[MUSIC]
>> Douglas Crockford: It's time now for
a Asynchronicity.
So there are two kinds of
functions in the world,
there are Synchronous functions and
Asynchronous functions.
So let's first look at
Synchronous functions.
A Synchronous function is
a function that does not return
until the work is completed or has failed.
So all of the functions that we wrote for
the last couple of days have been
synchronous functions
because that's how they work.
And that's a very useful thing to
have in a function because it means,
it's easy to reason about
its behavior over time.
When asynchronous function calls
another synchronous function.
The caller is suspended in time and
nothing advances until
the the callee returns.
If the caller is looking at a clock at
the moment that they make the call.
Their experience will be,
that the hands jump forward quickly.
But otherwise, they're not aware
that this stuff has happened,
except that the thing that they asked for
has magically been completed.
And that makes it easy for
us to reason about things,
unless we need to make multiple
things happen at the same time.
You can't make multiple things happen at
the same time if you're suspended in time.
So, the way that Topham mitigated
is by use of the threads,
that thread allows to have multiple
threads of execution happening through
a memory space at the same time.
So that's lots of things and
happen at the same time.
Unfortunately, races come
with some problems including,
threads come with problems
including races, deadlocks and
other reliability problems and performance
problems, and will look more at these.
So the threading model,
like all models comes with pros and cons.
And the first pro is a really important,
really significant one.
No rethinking is necessary.
You can take any existing piece of code,
put it in a thread and
it'll just work that way.
You don't have to make any changes to it,
in order to introduce it
to a threaded environment.
Now that doesn't necessarily mean
that you'll never need to change it,
but the starting up phase is really easy.
The next pro is that
blocking programs are okay.
It's okay for programs to block and
in fact, that is what threads are for.
Threads exist, so that things can stop.
And have other things
happening while it stopped.
Execution will continue as long
as any thread is not blocked.
But there are some cons.
The first con is that there is
stuck memory allocated per thread.
This used to be a significant problem.
It's not any more.
Moore's Law continued to
ramp on memory capacity, and
so thread stacks are now in the noise.
We don't care about them anymore.
A more important con is that if two
threads use the same memory at the same
time, a race may occur.
And the fact, this is a big problem.
So a lot of people been asking,
when are we going get threads in
JavaScript and the answer is never.
And let me illustrate why.
So here we have two programs which
will each run in its own thread and
we were run them,
possibly at the same time.
And there are a number of possible
consequences of this program.
One is, an array containing A and B.
And the other is,
an array containing B and A.
Because we can control in what
order these two threads run,
these are two possible outcomes.
But that's not the race I'm worried about,
the race I'm worried about is this one.
Another possible outcome of this program
is an array containing only a or
an array containing only b.
And this is not due to anything,
except what's happening in these two
statements, and you can look at these for
a long time and
try to figure out did half of my data go.
How did this fail?
It's really hard to reason about
programs that race in threads.
So let's zoom in on this and
look at what's going on.
So that's the first statement.
One of the things that
makes jobs descriptive and
expressively powerful language is
that one statement can do the work of
many statements and that's the case,
in this one, that one statement on the
top, does what the four green lines do.
It'll get the current length that
we'll assign to the part of the array.
If the length of the array has increased,
then we'll make that change.
And if we look at the second thread,
it also expands into stuff like that.
And we cannot control how these might
be ordered in actual execution.
So one possible ordering could be
both capture the length at the same time,
and both will be using that
to store into the rain both will be using
it to change the length of the arrays.
And as a result, which ever one run
second is probably going to win.
So that's where half of our data went.
And this stuff is really
hard to reason about.
For one thing, you can't see it in the
original code but it's worse than this,
because each of these statements could
expand into multiple machine language
statements.
And you don't know how
those are gonna interleave.
And each of those could expand at the low
level into micro instructions and
you can't control how those will
interleave and it may be that
the real time behavior of this threaded
code changes according to loading.
So might be working fine
during development, but
then fail when we put in production.
Or it's working fine most of the year,
but it fails at Christmas.
As things change, things that wouldn't
appear to affect the behavior of
the program can actually radically
affect the behavior of the program.
So it's impossible to have
application integrity,
when we're subject to race conditions.
So that we mitigate that
with mutual exclusion.
Mutual exclusion allows only one
thread to be running in a critical
section of memory at a time,
and there's a long history of this stuff,
starting with Dykstra semaphores.
Or as an horse monitors
the editor rendezvousing,
now we caught synchronization but
these are all transforms on the same idea.
This used to be operating system stuff.
Used to be only operating systems were
concerned with mutual exclusion and
running multiple things at the same time,
but this has all leaked into applications,
because of networking and
because of the multi-core problem.
The concern with networking is that,
>> Douglas Crockford: We want
to be able to have stuff happening
while slow things are happening.
And one of the slowest things we
can do is go out to the network,
cuz that has a large latencies, and
In some cases are noble latencies, and so
you can be stopped for a long time and
generally, you can't afford to have
systems be suspended for that long.
So you need threads in order
to allow them to continue.
Then there is the multi-core problem,
CPU designers have lost the ability
to make CPU's go faster.
So instead,
they're giving us more of them.
And we don't know how to use them,
unless if you have a problem that's
embarrassingly parallel,
then we can take advantage of it.
But most of what we do is
embarrassingly serial and
we don't know how to take multiple cores
and put them in our applications and
get a significant benefit from it.
So that's where we are.
So with mutual exclusion,
only one thread can be executing in
a critical section at a time and
all other threads waiting to execute in
the critical section will be blocked.
If the threads don't interact,
then the programs can run at
full speed across all the cores.
But if they do interact, then races will
occur unless mutual exclusion is employed.
Unfortunately, mutual exclusion
comes with its own dark side.
And that is deadlock.
Here we have two threads,
Alphonse and Gaston.
They are both program to wait for
the other to stand up,
before they can stand up.
This is deadlock.
It turns out computer
systems do this all the time.
Here's another example.
This is a real world
example from Sao Paulo.
You can think of,
apparently they do this all the time.
>> Speaker 2: [LAUGH]
>> Douglas Crockford: You can think of
each of these cars as being a thread,
which is ready to run.
It's just waiting for the thread that's
blocking it to get out of the way.
>> Speaker 2: [LAUGH]
>> Douglas Crockford: So deadlock,
it's a serious thing.